I think part of being an intellectual is
being perpetually profoundly
dissatisfied with your own ignorance and
then being perpetually profoundly too
satisfied with the ignorance of your own
society the rule of ignorance in the
shaping of and and functioning of your
own society um and that may or may not
exhibit itself in a in a really directly
political way I think is something
almost inevitably socio-political
there's some kind of social commentary
or social critique that's going to come
out of that
I think holding oneself to that standard
you know inevitably leads to social
frustrations because you live in a
society where people still we can use
any example but people still literally
cut the foreskin off a baby's penis to
act out a ritual you know in the Old
Testament you know it's ridiculous there
are a thousand possible examples of the
absurdities in our sight once you're of
that character we hold yourself to that
higher standard and you struggle with
with your own ignorance so what is the
point about one answer you know you
virtually before on this YouTube channel
the point is Who I am
the point is who you want to be and who
you want to become right and on some
level we all know that I mean it's
shallow and it's deep at the same time
like what you read and what you care
about and what kind of difference trying
to make in the world these things they
become who you are and you become them
in a very real sense if you sit on the
couch and watch football and drink beer
after work you become a sitting on the
couch football watching [ __ ]
that's and you are that's it's nothing
you can't put that aside so no that's
not who I really am
that's just yeah you can't think that's
not who I really am that's just what I
do in my in my free time no that is that
is who you are right or you could say
your free time is exactly
yes yes that's right well I think that's
also what haunts intellectuals right I
think that's that's what I want see so I
mean you know I mean why why try to
learn creak it's not like that today can
speak the Korean language fluently why
try to learn Chinese and why even within
that well I care about Chinese politics
and history in the kind of critical way
that I do well guess what I get to be me
you know like that's the final outcome
is that that you know it's not that this
is something I do that this is you know
this is who I am
this video has been a long time coming
I got a question many months ago from
James I'm just using first names James
is a longtime supporter on patreon it's
someone who's also a vegan involved in
baking and I would guess in response to
some video or another in which I used
the word in passing he asked me what
does it mean to you to be an
intellectual what is the meaning of
being an intellectual in 2018 I got my
best girl Willa Sierra off camera she
wanted what I'm looking at buddy it's
not like I'm looking at notes I've
written down from Berkeley or something
not looking at my script you know okay I
have like six different things to say
here and none of them are logically
linked together so one of the first
things ever say I was chatting with Tcat
recently and he met this in a totally
positive way but he said jokingly he
said you know aisel stop calling
yourself an autodidact
he said that's one of those laughable
things that makes everyone cringe like
if you call herself an autodidact he
said this was his joke or what he was
saying he said it's like calling
yourself an entrepreneur you know now I
get the joke he's making but this is one
of those things wearing a cowboy hat
isn't camp and it isn't a costume if
you're actually a cowboy if you actually
work on a ranch with cows I mean wearing
Spurs on your boots it's not a Halloween
costume
if that's you know
that's what you actually are and you
know I get the joke he's trying to make
like there are people who call
themselves an entrepreneur maybe
especially on YouTube maybe especially
within the vegan movement or maybe
especially just maybe in Fitness or
something maybe is thinking of some
other I guess that's true the fitness
youtubers they make an e-book or they
say giving Skype coaching in it they
call themselves nightmare ok once in
awhile people using that word as its
maybe cringe-worthy but what about the
people who really are entrepreneurs or
people who really aspire to be people
who are studying hard and working here
because that's that's really how they
they see their their career path and
what the reason I mention this though is
the really sort of snide undercurrent
which I think prevents a lot of people
from even thinking through what it means
to be an intellectual whether or not
something they aspired to be in the past
or present or future because for a lot
of people it's maybe selling you toyed
with as a teenager and that's something
you come back to later in life when you
have some more some more time and
leisure or something after a period of
desperately trying to make rent money um
you know this this culture that exists
on the Internet and to some extent in
real life of you know kind of
denigrating people for any any
pretensions you know they may have and
on the other side of that you know ok
look we've all seen movies that depict
people who have ridiculous potential
pardon me people are ridiculous
pretensions have become the butt of the
joke you know in the movie and what have
you but having ambition and having the
vulnerability to say openly that you
have that ambition you know whatever it
is you know it's it's not such a
terrible thing for someone to want to be
a poet you know should they really be
the butt of every joke and you know at
the same time there are so many
pretension it's in our society we're all
supposed to take you know so
tremendously seriously I'm no white
American culture is like that the idea
of the dream and don't don't puncture
something so on there are certain forms
of I don't know affected innocence you
know with being a dreamer that are that
are
surely valorized and protected and there
are others that are always kind of you
know the blood of Ashoka's oh so look
just just to dispense with that that
example you know briefly when I say I
was an autodidact in learning lotion the
Lao language I mean I had no teacher I
had no school I had no college I went to
the library I you know in some cases I
did in effect like make my own resources
and textbooks I can remember going to
one library where they had photocopies
of handouts that were used in United
Nations refugee camps you know for the
language education materials and looking
at that you know okay what's useful here
and French colonial dictionaries
dictionaries the language in the French
colonial period you know lotion to
French and then figuring out the writing
system had changed from that period to
the modern period and figuring out how
the spelling system worked and documents
from different eras I I was a an
autodidact than every possible sense of
the word maybe you know for you maybe 40
cat watching this or someone's watch
this you know maybe you think it's a
joke for someone to call themselves you
know an autodidact maybe sometimes it is
ridiculous when people call themselves a
cowboy you know okay but what about when
we're talking about people who actually
wear that hat or wear spurs on their
boots for for a reason you know at some
point the kind of endless cycle of I
mean undermining other people's you know
ambitions
that's real we're talking not
pretensions but ambitions you know to no
end at some at some point it has to stop
at some point we have to start living in
earnest and living without you know
really irony for the sake of irony you
know I say this as someone who certainly
you know certainly enjoys I used to joke
that you know irony is a force as
inevitable as irresistible as gravity in
the universe
well there are I laugh at myself a great
deal you know
than others at least at least here on
YouTube from time to time but yeah
there's a real question earnest of what
does it mean to be an intellectual so I
asked my girlfriend listed I think her
perspective this is totally so I want to
say right at the start of the video one
of the six or so disjointed thoughts
about this is very sincere and for me
once when Steve I think part of being an
intellectual is being perpetually
profoundly dissatisfied with your own
ignorance and then being perpetually
profoundly dissatisfied with the
ignorance of your own society the rule
of ignorance in the shaping of and and
functioning of your own society and that
may or may not exhibit itself in a in a
really directly political way there's
something almost inevitably
socio-political there's some kind of
social commentary or social critique
that's going to come out of that but you
sir you know this about me the way that
I'm constantly aware of my own ignorance
and gaps in my knowledge and I you know
I I it's not that I'm self censoring but
whenever I say things to you that's
really outside of my area of expertise
or it's based on one thing either I say
look this is only based on one or two
things I've read it or this is whatever
the there's a self critical aspect of
being aware of the limits of my of my
own ignorance and struggling against
them sincerely you know again it's not a
joke it's not it's not ironic it's not a
meme or it's not the kind of you know
muck that the internet seems to break it
of really sincerely struggling like you
know when I just finally read about the
history of the English Civil War when
will I get a chance to study half the
things I feel I need to study in that in
that kind of struggle and then holding I
think holding oneself to that standard
you know inevitably leads to social
frustrations because you live in a
society where people still we can use
any example but people still literally
cut the foreskin off of baby's penis to
act out a ritual
you know in the Old Testament you know
it's ridiculous
there were a thousand possible examples
of the absurdities in our sight once
you're of that character where you hold
yourself to that higher standard and you
struggle with with your own ignorance
yeah well I don't know if this is really
answering your question I was reminded
of somebody from my high school and in a
way he had the same ambition to fill in
the gaps of his knowledge and like he
really was earnest in trying to be a
painter oh yeah yeah his paintings were
and to be a poet I think he just was an
artist and generally his artistic type
and he he at one point was trying to be
a rapper like yeah so I mean but he was
like really you know earnest and all of
these ambitions and it was a dream when
people would like make fun of him or
something cuz he was just it didn't
bother him he was so confident that he
could just you know just brush it off
and continue with whatever he was
working on but you know for somebody for
somebody else that is it is hard to see
that that drive being made fun of yeah
and I think that is a problem in our
society as as as compared to the way he
would have been received he was putting
ambitions into playing football yes what
is into just playing video games or
exactly running money or joining the
army er but yeah I think I think at the
root of you know this particular example
and also you know for me to it is just a
dis I'd expect dissatisfaction with
society and feeling like like and also
just dissatisfaction with your own level
of knowledge on any topic you know Lobos
gonna say you know you're mentioning I
think you know a stereotype of
intellectuals which it makes sense but
falls apart under examination being
intellectuals is completely separate
from being an artist you know I think if
any one positive thing about it's
obvious but you know is Harvey Weinstein
an intellectual
there there are all kinds of examples of
artists who are not intellectuals or
people devoted their lives to creative
arts whether it's painting or filmmaking
or music or what-have-you and their
non-intellectual so it can't be that it
has anything to do with being a vegan
artist did you say there - several
things I totally see you can be an
intellectual and for that reason you
know you're in the arts yeah you can be
an intellectual for that reason you're a
scholar or a researcher there are all
kind of things you might put that
impulse into but I think that's that's
missing sort of mistake number one at a
show level um there's a you know I think
that the misconception I grew up with
was was just idea that because someone
is left-wing because someone's a
political activist therefore they're an
intellectual and again I think that's
that's misleading in the same sort of
way someone may be an intellectual and
then for that reason they get involved
with some political cause or another but
of course what I was gonna learn in life
starting as a child was that the vast
majority of people who were left-wing in
Canada is white it crispy gonna we're
not intellectuals I would say the
majority of them learned to kind of pass
themselves off as intellectuals when
necessary to have some of the
affectations because politically it is
more fashionable for the left-wing to to
pretend if intellectuals then it is for
conservatives or the far-right wing or
something but again these are really two
two very separate things so look for you
coming up I don't think this has been a
question you know you've you've had to
answer and you know I mean you didn't
grow up in a family where you were
expected to be an intellectual you
weren't educated educational as where
there's any question of anything
intellectual you know pattern of history
we're talking about that we're going on
yes but it's not that easy to pin down
what we really mean by yeah yeah when I
would sometimes certain people when I
would tell them that I was getting my my
undergraduate in English this
that I wanted to be a creative writer
they sumo writes write novels yeah and
they kind of scoffed at that but yeah
that wasn't ever my intention was was
getting the degree and I had to just
explain no no I'm not
I don't not a poet write books or if I
did write a book it would be a
nonfiction so anyway that that was my
once I got into college it became more
of a morning in my life but no I wasn't
expected to be an intellectual I was
just supposed to perform well in school
get good grades so that I could go to a
good college and start a good career and
make money work that was really the goal
in in learning Brahmin learning to be
right somebody who could support
themselves well we just talked about for
like the 10th time this year Aristotle's
philosophy of education - so I lectured
repeatedly in China but though Aristotle
education the university classes I was
teaching so now I was just reading the
the primary source again and I mean
aerosol has this idea of that well it's
similar to the much used phrase during
here that the unexamined life is not not
worth living but he points out that the
purpose of Education in his view is not
any particular skill or ability it's not
earning money it's not winning
competitions the ultimate purpose of
Education is the enjoyment of leisure
you know I'll come back and say a little
bit more about what do you mean about
leisure that's what comes up in this
situation but you get this sense this
isn't this part isn't that directly
argued that by becoming more and more
educated you're in effect using your
leisure at a higher and higher level of
refinement or quality or sophistication
and that that is the purpose of
education but you know the actual Greek
term used for for leisure is Scully and
he explains himself when he says leisure
he doesn't mean playing games she
doesn't mean wasting time he doesn't
mean relaxing you know when he when he
it explains a moderate length that when
he talks about leisure we talk about
something that fundamentally you know
expands your mind but um I would say
again what what Aristotle's describing
is not being an intellectual and it's
very significant when he illustrates
this so the main example we have him
discussing at length is the significance
of the study of music melissa spent many
years studying music yeah and he sets
down look when you from Aristotle's
perspective when you study music it
should only be basically you're learning
to play instruments in order to increase
your appreciation of music exercise your
soul and what have you he says you
should never gain any technical skill in
music
you should never participate in
competitions you should never perform
perform before an audience to become a
professional because then he says you'll
be perverted by trying to trying to
impress the crowd this is also
interesting being intellectual right the
idea of the intellectual is not that
it's someone like a stand-up comedian
doing whatever will make the audience
laugh that it's not you know an
intellectual maybe a stand-up comedian
or maybe a filmmaker or something but
that they're not doing something
commercial they're not doing what for
the audience yeah but worried about it
but what are they doing it for it's very
easy to say that negatively oh this
isn't for the audience right right but
then what is it for is lowered so you
know I was taught that anything like
that would be a waste of time you know
just doing something I when I learned to
play music the first thing that I did
was performing in front of an audience
and petition solo competition right also
you know competing to get to the top
chair competing just with other schools
like our whole Orchestra would be
competing in schools there Aristotle
would be flabbergasted indeed you know
the main goal was to learn technique so
that is that is interesting too and like
just a word thing for so you know that
this is part of the founding idea of the
Olympics also I've pointed this out to
you before the Olympics became
commercialized was that it was not
supposed to be competition to
professionals but between amateurs the
idea of the gentlemen Ammar
this ran through European philosophy of
what it meant to be an aristocrat partly
drawing on Aristotle probably on things
the idea that the aristocrat is the sort
of ultimate dilettante he doesn't become
a great painter or a great musician but
he's a patron of all the Arts he learns
them all to some extent he appreciates
them all soon as that you know he can
play the violin but he doesn't you know
he's not a journeyman you know musician
or something this idea of self
cultivation but you know yeah but we're
meaning a dilettante never going throw
and never become a commercial insult
right that's that's a big part of the
European tradition partly directly as a
result of Aristotle yeah I mean I know
the topic of this video is not about
music education but that is the trend
that I saw when growing out that you
know it's this big focus on competing
and performing the best but then one
typically most students when they're
done with high school they never pick up
their instruments again that's right and
they don't use it in this dilettante way
okay but look this is also true of our
education in biology or education and
math for most of us you never pick up a
biology book ever biology isn't now put
assume that gets that the question of
what is the function of Education etc
etc right yeah yeah nicely but but the
definition I proposed at the start of
this video too I think it is possible to
be an intellectual within biology or
within the pure sciences or whatever you
know I think you'd be applying the same
underlying profound dissatisfaction to
critique of what's going on in you know
the establishment of biomedical research
or you know and obviously to your own
for your frustrations with your own with
your own ignorance or what have you then
having that that play out in one way or
another yeah so look um you know in what
context in 2018 would anyone even
describe themselves as an intellectual
so I mean almost the only time this
comes up in my life now is the people
and the internet and people who are
really not even a position to say this
telling me that I'm not
I'd say that you're right see this this
kind of insult and you know I mean sir
but in what context where I even say
that I am one like how old can he even
come up in our society I mean sorry
autodidact is different I still don't
know you know I taught myself this
language I became a scholar in this
field or that field with you no no no no
outside source of authority or formal
education I sure being an autodidact
comes up and normally it's kind of a bad
thing as opposed to being a formally
credential person in the field without
you you know um I know sorry not all
fields mad I decree in a jib way I
formally studied create a chip away at a
university in Canada I there was a
chalkboard
there were exams that completely formal
education in that field so we don't have
all my credentials that created it would
but it wasn't some fields I wasn't on at
that act but in saying you know that I'm
an intellectual look this came up
totally different type of conversation
but you know when I look at people like
durianrider or people like Joe best
living in Thailand Laos Cambodia and
someone I've said in passing you know I
don't really judge these guys by their
their sex lives I'm not that sex
negative you know but from my
perspective they're scumbags just
because of the life they're living of
their you know period you know not it's
not that I think they should be living
in celibacy it's not that I would
respect their lives if they were doing
the same thing but but it but in
celibacy for me sex is not the issue
there and when I was living there you
know I did ride a bicycle I you know I
live the life in some ways on the
surface that was similar but I was
literally riding my bicycle from the
archives to the gym I mean you know I
was working out now I've had a bicycle I
was doing manuscript research historical
research political research I can say
humanitarian research I was actively
applying for jobs the Amanah terrian
field if you're not rich if you don't
have money to put in the table spend a
lot more time looking for humanitarian
work than doing it and I mean again at
all this time there was this deep you
know dissatisfaction so I mean look even
within
I mean I can give give a long list of
examples but you know um I remember was
talking to another actually this guy was
a journalist but I could say another
researcher about the history of the the
French Empire in that part of the world
and he disagreed with something I had
written something I published and the
claim was actually about what happened
in the land battles of a certain period
of France conquering and trying to
control that part of the world and he
said no no this you know this isn't this
isn't true you know what's on and I said
oh well how do you know and I was able
to say very readily how I knew what I
knew and and asked about it and I
remember he had he had the honesty to
just say he realized only after I
challenged him that actually all of his
sources were French government
propaganda he said wow you know what
I've actually never seen anything
written from the lotion perspective or
the Thai perspective and he just folded
he realized that you know what there was
a difference there so look you know as
absurd as it sounds not only is it
possible to work in something like the
academic study of history and not be an
agate and not be an intellectual it's
common it's not just possible to do
humanitarian work in Laos and not be an
intellectual the vast majority are not
it's not you know it's not just possible
to be an artist and not be an
intellectual you know the vast majority
are so we're looking for we're looking
for the trait making the trade you know
what is the trade that makes someone
make someone to lecture well this is my
my way of putting it now I did I made a
couple other notes I mean you know okay
so we haven't forgot about this I mean
the other question I raised this comes
up in all kinds of contexts is the issue
of not making excuses for yourself and I
mean this is almost you're saying the
same thing but inside out that you're
not making excuses your self and you're
not making excuses for others I think
that's what it what it leads to you know
no it was me so you know if you get an
a-plus in history you can get an a-plus
repeating complete mythology about
history you know I mean you can you can
just get an a-plus ok let's let's pick a
not too
vaca t'v we were talking recently about
Thomas Jefferson you know so you can
write a hit you can get an A+ in high
school University saying that Thomas
Jefferson was the greatest president
United States
what about First Nations what about
American Indians what about the
indigenous people I mean I think exactly
the point is you know do not make
excuses of yourself you not make the
society you live it if you're a real
intellectual you're not going to be
satisfied with reading a textbook that
just says Thomas Jefferson is the
greatest president for reasons explained
said or even writing your essay
repeating this kind of this kind of
propaganda and getting a plus you are
never be gonna have that that
dissatisfaction you're gonna hold
yourself to a higher standard and then
when you find out that other side of the
story
now you're gonna be looking at your
history professor you can be looking at
your school you gonna be looking at the
political system in the country of
living and you're gonna be you're gonna
be holding it to a higher standard also
it's it's that you're not making excuses
for yourself and you're maybe not
accepting the socially sanctioned or
socially celebrated excuses that that
exist you know and so I think this is
one of them where do you think that
comes from how can you expect a kid who
goes through education the same
education system as parents that don't
really emphasize ya know look it's it's
a great question well I don't have an
answer you know we heard a totally
laughable character in mentem we didn't
have that clip on Shelby he broke down
at one point and he just said that's why
I can never be happy it was in the
middle of him ranting look but look i
mean ii think that's that's part of it I
mean I think part of it is you need I
think part of it is character you know
Schopenhauer likes to say villain on
disk Atari can't teach wanting I mean
part of it is like you know being
rapacious being uncompromising do their
head then and being very frustrated and
unhappy if you can just believe this
sanctioned myth like everyone else if
you can just go on eating yogurt and
believing Thomas Jefferson was a great
man and you're not questioning well what
about slavery and the extinction of
indigenous peoples in their languages
and forced assimilation so well yeah
thank you but you know maybe there is a
kind of happiness but it's exactly that
character of the unexamined life is not
worth living and getting out in examine
right right yeah I guess this snores
yeah more explicitly the excuse making
right I mean that's [ __ ] middle-aged
in a nutshell I know you have your
comfort blanket of excuses wrapped
around you at all times
yeah it's true yeah jurors are normally
seen as more inclined to be intellectual
leaders haven't gotten used to you know
the excuse me right well I remember like
as a teen you know as an adolescent
teenager being very dissatisfied very
unhappy but I don't I didn't use that in
a positive way in this way you know I
put my focus in into you know performing
while in school and you know that was
that was really how that energy was put
forward but yeah I mean look I think you
know I think there's another question of
law but you didn't become an
intellectual I'm sorry I'm in this no
reality if you're gonna examine
intellectual what's starting now I mean
I think that's the other thing
implicitly here I mean sir I mean you
warrant intellectuals a teenager Noren
University no I mean yeah I think that's
one of the questions I'd ask is is it
possible to be an intellectual and be a
conformist and I think you know
depending on which society you're
looking at the answer might be yes but
you know in almost any society we're
talking about it's inevitable that being
a intellectual at least you're being a
nonconformist because as soon as you
start asking these kinds of questions as
soon as you become this kind of
uncompromising character you say wow
this is full society is built on lies
this this society is built on calm
Mises I can't make I can't / you become
this kind of irascible figure I mean it
is a little bit like Socrates as image
of the gadfly but the problem is with
sergeant's image the gadfly bites the
horse and I'm pointing out the intellect
you bite yourself you know much more
than your your discomfort it's it's your
own misery it's your own discomfort you
know on a very very fundamental level
yeah but you know if you live in a in a
radically better society than the one we
live like alumina site that's not built
on genocide and lies it with genocide
that's not built on people eating yogurt
and yogurt and cutting the penises sorry
cutting the foreskins off the penises of
babies if it's not built in all these
ridiculous lesser but even even if the
United States in your generation I'm you
know your whole life the United States
has been at war with countries most
people can't spell properly there's been
constant war the most meaningless
unforgivable kind and that you know that
stuff bothered me deeply you know
Candace involvement everything else you
know let me start people talk about the
Vietnam generation your generation is
the Afghanistan and you know Iraq
generation some people may just care
less but I mean you know that those
those questions the ethical issues
raised sorry look I just tell you
honestly but I mean I remember I this is
also part of being intellectual that I
did the research I was incredibly
disturbed the first time I read about
the United States use of depleted
uranium as as a shielding both as
bullets and as armor you know in in war
that was incredibly you know disturbing
to me now I did research on it obviously
not that much research so I'm not a
chemist or something
but I looked into why the army was using
that and I realized look you know even
though this has some unbelievably
negative ecological side effects you
know what I'd make the same decision
because it's about saving lives you know
it's about you know ultimately stopping
a bullet that's gonna go through a tank
or something you know you know I just
say that sometimes that that same
distant section but still I can remember
my sense of horror that started me
looking into that you know did you have
like some like didn't you have somebody
that you could emulate this so go on
it's great question
like I thought the way to better myself
or you know like wrote it to be I don't
know how to say this without sounding
like cocky or something but like to be
to prove to other people that I was more
intelligent than that I was like I'm
gonna work my ass off and get into the
best school in the state and stuff like
I didn't know that I could put the
energy into something else and I think
my life probably would have been better
you know I'd give you a gonna kiss
beside the table you know anyway yeah
I'm just saying yeah yeah no look I mean
no role models no no it's it's look it's
it's a great topic I mean in some ways
it's the shallowest thing in the world
you know what what does this label mean
you know to be an intellectual or you
know and I'm asking this at a time in
2018 when almost nobody uses the label
and when it is laughed at so you know um
sam Harris has tried to revive the label
and talks about the intellectual dark
web and the summit it is laughable it is
worth scoffing at it is worth ridicule
you know it's true I mean like you know
you say are you wearing a cowboy hat
because you're actually at cowboy were
you you know is it dressed up for
Halloween some people are real
intellectuals and some are not
yeah you know and it's really
interesting to get down to the question
of what that what that mark is sure
right but I mean you know what can I say
no I didn't have these we'll talk a
little bit more about that but I mean
you know sure other traits you have to
have is that you're you know you're not
easily impressed you're not easily
overwhelmed that you don't you know sign
up for the kind of excuses and
half-truths right no people are giving
you yeah right like I mean well I knew
what was kids didn't even like read the
textbooks right so like I was like no
I'm gonna sit down and read this
freaking textbook I'm gonna read all the
books that are assigned yeah but
and said the camera but you never almost
ever went to the library and got other
got other sources that challenged the
textbook no no who didn't get sources
that prove the textbook was wrong
I didn't that's what I did but that's
but that's what I did that's what I did
even in theater even when I was in the
theater and studying studying acting and
plays and you know sorry I mean not
politics not directly of course I was
only interested in it because of
politics I was getting books out of the
library that challenged what was being
taught in the classroom independent
textbook yeah there's a different
approach of it you know yeah even for
that so of course you know I'm looking
at whatever the history of Japan I mean
oh a certain movement that starts with a
simple question so people talk about the
history of Japan but nobody wants to
talk about that Japan used to have
another Island that's now part of Russia
you know what's what's being covered up
there well it turns out I discovered
this whole massacre of this whole
history history going back more than 300
years that's really interesting and that
really took but nobody taught me that
that wasn't it and it's X for granular I
mean nothing you know so I mean that's
that's just me being dissatisfied with
what is being taught and looking out you
know for that stuff and you know sorry
when I did the history of Paul there's a
strike it's it's it's a it's an obvious
example but but it's also worth
mentioning I met a man who was born and
raised in Sri Lanka he was Hindu and
even though he was a critic of the caste
system so this is caste cas de caste
system is a system of ethnic and
economic inequality it's it's hard to
but it's similar to my part aid or what
have you but it's a traditional form of
of both racism and classism in Indian
culture so this guy I met he lived his
whole life in Sri Lanka and he was very
much aware of the caste system within
Hinduism and when I started talking
about the caste system within within
Buddhism within tera vaada Buddhism in
showing he was just shocked and he
looked at me and he said but there is no
caste system within us yeah yeah well I
was involved in Buddhism that might be a
lie lots of you that's like saying
there's no racism
then Buddhism but it's but it's a very
particular form of racism that really
exists and really as history in-depth
and they can prove the existence I was
never the kind of person who you say oh
that's good news you know clothes no I'm
someone who sees that and says something
wrong I'm not so much so I mean Thailand
was very proud that they had no slavery
and no caste system and of course if you
really study the history of Thailand you
find out exactly about their history of
slavery you know yeah so I mean you know
we find it up brutal and terrible
history was like oh that's good news
so history of Thailand equals good
history of Europe equals bad case closed
no you know we rolled sri lanka equals
good india equals bet no you know soon
with any of those things with no
prompting and no role model there's this
dissatisfaction with my own ignorance
dissatisfaction with the role of
ignorance what I'm seeing and that you
know that leads me you know I'm not
saying I didn't grow up with wise you
know that they realized that I I think
it probably took me a longer time to
tell that they were lies then you know
you grew up with what the Communists you
family you know communist parents and
from what you said it sounds like from a
young age you could decipher that these
were just ridiculous statements and I
mean I guess maybe that's part of it
like I'm not not trusting and what you
hear because yeah I think I think I was
programmed to to trust in what I and and
think that what I'm what I'm being
taught is right you see me just in the
last couple of days even with Aristotle
you know there's a real sense which I'm
not believing what the translator tells
me or I'm not you know what I mean
you've seen the way I'll get the source
right I find another article and then
this guy's kind of lying about some
things don't you yeah
you've seen the way even with something
as mainstream as philosophy of Aristotle
I'm kind of interrogating the text
although I'm questioning what does the
author really mean and to what extent is
this being misrepresented by the
translator or this
or what have you so you know I'm like
that you know all the time things yeah
look see you know you you would so she
mentioned I was raised by Communists but
I'm not Dominus but my parents certainly
raised me to be a communist and I
rejected that um I think there is
something to be said when you grow up
with one set of values or one set of
truth claims being propounded inside the
home and then you see them being refuted
outside the home again again I think
that does have a certain effect on
people and the vast majority people even
use grow up Muslim or Catholic you know
in the Western world grow up with that
I'm sorry but look just let's say you
grow up in Los Angeles and your parents
tell you that nobody should have sex
before marriage yeah
it's shallow but it's deep at the same
time right you grow up with seeing that
Carter's I don't think that makes you
into an intellectual I don't think it's
the same yeah impetus variables I mean I
think there's something there worth
talking about I do you know me yeah yes
maybe it makes you into a nihilist maybe
it makes you into a relativist you know
maybe there's some kind of making
question but wouldn't solve the values
inside the household and the values
outside of the household being
incompatible or one feeding there I
think that's a major part of the modern
experience you know that wasn't part of
the feudal medieval experience but even
just people who grew up with mainstream
Muslim parents or conservative Catholic
parents you know it's it's not just
communists who grow up with that you say
wow you know so my father thinks Joe my
father thought Joseph Stalin was a great
guy my mother has literally said that
she regarded Mao Zedong massacring
people and Tibet was a good thing you
know that's what's inside the household
and then even just what you see on
newspapers or what your school teachers
say or something's going but I don't
think that makes you you know yeah but I
guess I guess the importance of it is
that it makes you skeptical like and
having somebody that has his influence
on you to be skeptical it could lead to
wait to that train but my parents were
not teaching me to be skeptical yeah
things that they were teaching me to be
Dominic yeah that's I said before I said
I could say a little bit more about it
but I mean okay I said earlier that
being left-wing or even being just hyper
political be someone who cares a lot
about politics doesn't make you an
intellectual I would here combine that
with the fact that being an expert
doesn't make you intellectual so in Laos
Southeast Asia but this could be this
could be anywhere this could be in
Canada's commitment you know if you're
an expert in sewage treatment you know
you're an expert in pipes and plumbing
you can do great work all over the world
in humanitarian the humanitarian sector
refugee camps third world countries need
this kind of export and I dealt with
exports in a million fields or millions
but in many fields that you know but you
know you can meet someone who's an x-ray
technician doing humanitarian work but
you can also meet people you meet
someone who's an expert in like physics
and they're like yeah they're there
you know they would normally be Germans
they say yeah they decided to come out
Southeast Asia and really help the
university in a third world country and
prove their teaching of physics and
their physics person I met many people
doing that okay but being an expert is
very often dogmatic those people will
come to Laos and they say hey I know I
know the true physics I know the true
way to teach physics I'm an expert in
the science of physics I'm here to show
you that someday and they may genuinely
know they know sewage treatment and
they're here to show you the right way
to set up your sewage tree and so on so
I'm not using super culturally
relativistic examples here right but
they're not there to learn they're not
there to question they're not going to
do any of the the don't or self-doubt
I've described right sorry I mean
something individually you may need one
who's who's an intellectual but being an
expert that way if anything tends to
dogmatic thinking and you know preaching
out of this kind of certainty and not
what a proposing here is being the main
issue of having this you know
self-critical mentality that leads to
being critical
and I would say that is very much the
attitude of hardcore left-wingers
communists socialists are just dogmatic
left-wing people they feel that they are
an expert in the suffering of the poor
of revolution economics a lot of them
feel they're expert and they know
something but economics they know
something about political conditions and
you know progressive politics and then
they're just dogmatically informing
other people of what that is you know
yeah it's not going to be the same kind
of self-criticism and social criticism
the same kind of deep dissatisfaction
with your own ignorance and the rule of
ignorance around you yeah and you know I
think that look I mean like my parents
model what it with the ideal of being a
left winger was to basically be
bourgeois the member of the you know not
to be poor yeah but then to go out and
organize labor unions to go on strike
for this this was their model obviously
it goes it's really from the 1930s or
earlier it's a totally different idea
the world the idea is that there are
these poor ignorant laborers who are
working in factories and and mines who
have a much lower level of education
than you do and what you need to do is
go out there and inform them they're
oppressed they're sold rest they don't
even realize they're oppressed and you
organize them into a revolt or a
revolution our general strike or what or
what have you
right and look I mean when I was in Laos
I was learning all the time when I was
dealing with the Karina jib way and
someone - it's like you know that's
that's why I say I wasn't trying to
convert those people to veganism you
know what I mean like you know I'm not
here - I'm not arriving here as an
expert you know to deliver the you know
I'm not delivering you the the gospel of
something I'm certain in and devoted and
committed to you know I'm I'm really
there was an intellectual and they were
knowing you know self-doubt I met sorry
this this was an example I didn't
appreciate that well at the time I met a
young woman and I think she was getting
her PhD in social geography so
all-purpose social science
and she said that you know they did a
unit looking at prostitution in I think
Thailand and Laos in that in that region
and all of them they were all female
says a lot of a lot of social sciences
are a majority female but she said all
the all the graduate students were
female and they came into class having
done the reader came into the seminar
and they were all kind of starting off
the seminar saying oh this is you know
this is an obscenity this is a
humanitarian disaster this is terrible
situation of prostitution and
gentlemen's and so each of them got to
speak brief another professor said okay
now we're going to do a comparison
everyone get out of blank sheet of paper
we're gonna put up you know wipe the
wipe the chalkboard clean each of the
things you just complained about is it
better or worse in Thailand than it is
in Germany in fact all of them were
ashamed by the end of it because exactly
the things they've complained about they
actually had to accept that the
situation was war by their own criteria
they had been hypocrites and the
situation was actually worse in Germany
this entire man now look I mean at the
time I didn't really see the end I
thought that this way I didn't kind of
get it when you think about it deeply
this is again this is kind of the
missionary mentality versus you know
really being an intellectual really
questioning because it should we need a
question I mean you know being in
Thailand led me to question you know a
things about my own society things about
my own assumptions things about what do
I know and what do I not know you know I
mean I think that is the point is
exactly to be always living on that
productive razor's edge of doubt where
you no doubt becomes a cutting tool to
cutting to cut away at your own
ignorance and cut away at the false
assumptions of the society you live in
that you've been raised in and so on and
you know we all we all become sharper
thereby I think that's you know I think
that is the difference I'm sure within
her ph.d program
some people were intellectuals and some
we're not or became intellectuals and
you know again within the theater within
within any field of research
you know then I feel the politics of the
Arts
not everyone is gonna be an intellectual
yeah I get what you're saying yeah kind
of being an expert you get blinders on
you don't think of the big picture you
just think on one topic in particular
and it's it's kind of one directional
expertise it comes from the experts
yeah I'd say also you know I'm thinking
of a CBC documentary I heard of the aura
interview was but you know I think that
another kind of false symptom Oh up
being intellectual I think one of the
things it's emphasized more in some
cultures than others one of the concepts
being intellectual is that you're not
motivated by money and China's like this
the idea that if your intellectual you
you live in poverty in ancient ancient
Athens was like this to some extent
different cultures to different extents
that you know and again this comes back
to well if you if you're in the theater
is it commercial is it for the audience
if you're paying a painter
are you a commercial painter you can be
a purely commercial but you can be an
illustrator you know drawing Batman
comics you know because Batman pays you
a lot better than this kind of thing I
think again that's actually really a
false you know there's some overlap
there but that doesn't make unity the
fact that you're not motivated by money
or the fact that what you produce as a
researcher as an artist as a writer as a
political activist because again one of
the things is you could just be an
intellectual or just be directly trying
to change the world through politics the
fact that it doesn't make money
I think it's utterly unrelated to
whether or not you're intellectually and
whether your role in society is being
above mine as well and if it does make
money if it happens to I think that's I
think that's also doesn't it doesn't put
it this way it does not invalidate your
claim to be an intellectual if you
happen to have made a lot of money out
of doing whatever it is you're doing so
I think that's really that's really
profoundly unrelated but you know I mean
this goes back even to Socrates and so
on where part of his he literally stood
there defending his life in court and
parted with a big deal was I didn't do
this for money you know I wasn't you
know I'm doing this I'm doing this to
awaken Athens from its slumber I'm doing
this to
make men question what is virtue right
you know what is the meaning of life and
then to motivate them to be better
people and for our society to be a
better society that's his defense of
himself was I never accepted I never
accepted payment for this right yeah so
we will see we will see if life makes it
hypocrite at me but you know we'll see
if I manage to combine being a baker
with being an intellectual I mean well I
mean there's gonna be a lot of reasons
are going to be a lot of excuses to not
spend time you know researching things
independently yeah and sorry I mean like
a this is like a personal note but I
guess I do want to sorry I keep going
back to this like idea because like you
know the making excuses thing I think it
was partly like how you know you know my
I guess the biggest influence of
skepticism was was my dad because of he
he was never actually um like he would
cook he would go to church but he didn't
want to right you would criticize what I
was learning in school saying it was it
was liberal but he never provided an
alternative you know like so and also
like you know I'm almost like pretty
ultra conformist type of person so like
so it kind of made this this this ideal
for me is like to be questioning but
still conform you know like like inside
then you'll have these doubts but just
on the outside conform and don't you
know just don't let it influence you so
it was like you know I didn't have that
extra push so I do think that it's that
is important to have some some kind of
like alternative and anyway sorry I mean
I know this is kind of off topic how I'm
ending this
but like no I think what do you mean by
alternative I mean I think that's the
tragedy of being intellectual right
exactly
most of the time there there is no
alternative I mean you don't have an
alternative to your school system you
don't turn it to your political system
or what have you
like any often in the position of just
criticizing this
plenty of what's wrong with it you know
it's funny about how terrible it is that
people still circumcise their children
yes he's all still yogurt and so on
right right you don't you know I mean
you know some a I think that's yeah I
think that's part of it um is that you
know it's it may be largely or entirely
destructive you know yeah but I do think
it's important to continue doing that if
we do if we do become bakers and that
becomes our full-time jobs well look i
think that this comes back to the theme
of people kind of ridiculing one another
for being intellectuals or seeming to be
the were calling themselves
intellectuals you know our aims in life
or extrinsic but they're regarded as
intrinsic by others they're regarded as
your identity so you know you bake bread
for a living so you are a baker and then
there were all these assumptions about
that who you are what you're doing so on
you know you've seen that I mean my my a
sensible job has changed from one month
to the next familiar I have been a
professor and if you want to say that if
you wanna say oh I'm a professor at a
university in China that may suggest
certain things about you and you know
there was a time when I told people well
I am you know involved with First
Nations languages Korean a jib way and
this is what I'm studying at these the
projects I'm trying to do and there was
another time when I was doing
humanitarian work and you know the other
time when I introduced myself to people
and they said what are you doing I said
well I've been doing research on stone
inscriptions and palm leaf manuscripts
in this ancient dead language you know I
mean the so these these are these are
aims they're extrinsic they're created
by fleeting bizarre circumstances you
know that come and go but who I am and
what drives me as an intellectual has
utterly you know remain the same yeah
right and your reading isn't your
intellectual pursuits aren't governed by
what your what your goals for making
money are leaner like or any money
whatever your career was at the time
your
but you you we're reading on the side
things completely unrelated or well
right am i reading also wasn't limited
the way yours was by the courses I took
into God like you you're reading up on
Greek literature and you about the
English Civil War you know you're not
intended to go into the history of
England that's right classics well
that's right but but on the other hand
I'm also a my money that's right and
it's normal to be more money but it's
also true that I'm not satisfied with
what aerosol describes as being a
dilettante with just you know you know
to only learning right only learning to
play the lute enough to be gratified by
the sound of its music you know what I
mean like that's that's what Aristotle's
about is just you know so and you know
yeah I'm mad you say yeah I really
admire that and I think there's a subset
of people that do admire that but I
think the more people would think about
it in more realistic terms and think
that you're wasting time or you know
what's the point and ultimately you have
to you have to make it worth it you have
to make a point right okay but look okay
so I'm gonna give to transfer that and
I'm gonna hit the stop button you yeah
so what is the point one answer you know
you virtually before on this YouTube
channel the point is who I am
the point is who you want to be and who
you want to become right and on some
level we all know that I mean it's
shallow and it's deep at the same time
like what you read and what you care
about and what kind of difference trying
to make in the world these things they
become who you are and you become them
in a very real sense if you sit on the
couch and watch football and drink beer
after work you become a sitting on the
couch football watching [ __ ]
that's and you are there's nothing you
can't put that aside so no that's not
who I really am that's just yeah you
can't say that's not who I really am
that's just what I do in my
in my free time no that is that is who
you are right or you could say your free
time is exactly yes yes that's right
well I think that's also what haunts
intellectuals right I think that's
that's what I want seen so I mean you
know I mean why why try to learn Cree
it's not like that today can speak the
Korean language fluently why try to
learn Chinese and why even within that
why I care about Chinese politics and
history in the kind of critical way that
I do well guess what I get to be me you
know like that's the final outcome is
that that you know it's not that this is
something I do that this is you know
this is who I am
yeah and you know the other you know
shallower question is this kind of
reading this kind of inquiry
self-criticism of you how do you make it
productive how do you show others we've
talked about that recently where I said
hey you know what instead of like
instead of just reading a book you can
read three books and then you know read
some articles about them put together an
article you know write an article put it
on the internet so you're taking reading
you're making reading productive yeah
and maybe five other people are gonna
see that article I mean you're reading
books you're taking notes on them you're
making a youtube video discussing them
maybe fifty people see that video but I
mean you know there are ways to make the
reading productive and there are ways to
take your own conclusions out of the
seclusion of an intellectual and subject
them to the criticism and feedback of
others which you know for it depends on
your personality type for some people
that's very important because if they
don't have that they're gonna end up you
know in a echo chamber of their own you
know delusions there for some people
it's report for other people I think
less so depends on how effective your
how effectively your self-critical or
what-have-you but sure instead of I'm
you know is it is it accumulating
knowledge for the sake of you my
knowledge I don't think the effect is
really cumulative in that way I may
that's a misleading way to describe it
for that reason but then you know yes
you could make it productive in both
senses it is productive it tragically
intellect ibly escape
it's productive because ultimately the
product is you and then on the other
hand there are ways to make reading
productive there's ways to make learning
productive as an intellectual activity
productive and what you see now on
YouTube what you see now on my blog in
my publications and so on those are
examples of how we try to happen if you
want to ask me a questions you know one
our answer to a question that I think
was one sentence long from from James
support the channel for $1 a month on
patreon write to me I'll probably write
back or you may be horrified to have an
hour-long video show off
[Music]